
# Taṇhā and Bhava

We have seen that any actual present points to many possibilities. From
these possibilities conscious life makes a choice and exercises it. In
exercising the choice Consciousness finds its new footing.

The question now is: *What* determines that particular choice and no
other? Why is it that at any given instant I choose to do this and not
any other?

The answer is simply that I *want* that thing towards which *that*
particular action will lead me. Keeping the wanted thing in mind, or
wanting that thing, I take the action that will lead me to it. Of all
the courses of action available I select and pursue that particular
course of action which leads me to the wanted thing. Throughout the
action, the wanting lasts.

Now, a *puthujjana*’s want can be categorized under three main
headings called *kāma*, *bhava* and *vibhava*. Wanting any one or more
of these things is called *tanhā*.

The word *tanhā* is usually translated as Craving or Thirst. This
however, tends to give an inaccurate picture, since either of the
words Craving or Thirst gives the impression of an acute wanting. But
wanting *kāma*, *bhava* or *vibhava* in the *slightest* degree is
*tanhā*. On the other hand the word *wanting* is too wide to be used
for *tanhā*, since though the Arahat has *no tanhā* he certainly has
other wants like wanting to eat food when hungry or wanting to rest
when tired.  There seems to be no exact English equivalent to *tanhā*,
so we shall use it as it is.

The *puthujjana* has *kāma-tanhā*, *bhava-tanhā* and *vibhava-tanhā*.

What now are *kāma*, *bhava* and *vibhava*?

*Kāma* is sense-pleasure,[^1] i.e., the pleasure connected with the
senses. Wanting pleasure that arises in connection with one or more of
the senses is called *kāma-tanhā*.

What is *bhava*?

It is not possible to answer this question and indicate the meaning of
the answer effectively and with sufficient clarity unless the question
that was left unanswered in the first chapter is answered – the
question: As against the Five Grasping Groups could there be *just*
the Five Groups?

The answer is: Yes.

The unique discovery that the Buddha made was just this: there could
be Five Groups *without* Grasping. In other words, there could be an
individual (i.e., as distinct from other individuals) who has no
notion whatever of ‘self’, ‘I’ and ‘mine’. This individual is called
Arahat (*arahaṃ*). *The Arahat does not consider anything whatever as
‘mine’*. The Buddha experienced this state of affairs in himself.
Thus he was the first Arahat to have appeared in the world in our time.

*Bhava* literally means ‘existence’ or ‘being’. But existence of
what?  Being what? It refers to the *existence of ‘self’*, or to the
notion ‘*I exist*’. Or we may say it refers to *being a ‘self’*, to
*being a subject (‘I’)*. Or yet, to the *existence of subjectivity*. A
life-mode completely devoid of all notions of ‘self’ and of thoughts
of ‘I’ and ‘mine’ will *not* be a *bhava*.

The *puthujjana* looks upon his existence as ‘*my* existence’. He
thinks ‘my self exists’ or ‘I exist’. This looking upon one’s
existence as ‘my existence’ or ‘existence of my self’ is called
having *bhavadiṭṭhi*. When there are no notions of ‘self’ no thoughts
of ‘I’ and ‘mine’ there can be no such thing as ‘my existence’ and so
on.

To speak very precisely, *bhava* is the existence of the notions
‘self’ and ‘I’. Something is, of course, always identified as ‘self’
and ‘I’, which again, is one or more of the Five Grasping Groups. But
*bhava* is really a matter of one’s thinking just as much as Grasping
(*upādāna*) is.[^2]

It is the mind that is freed from the canker of *bhava*, just as it is
the mind that is freed from the cankers of sense-*pleasure* and
Ignorance.  The Buddha said that his mind was freed from the canker
of *bhava*: “Thus knowing, thus seeing, my mind was freed from the
canker of sense-pleasure, freed from the canker of *bhava*, freed from
the canker of Ignorance.”[^3] He described himself as “gone to the end
of *bhava*” – *bhavassa pāragu*.[^4] He did not say he was *going* to
the end of *bhava*.  He said that he had already *gone* to the end of
*bhava*; which means he lives free from *bhava*. In him *bhava* has
ceased. He is *bhavanirodha*, because he is completely free from
notions of ‘self’ and from thoughts of ‘I’ and ‘mine’. He does not
look upon his existence as ‘*my* existence’. He does not think ‘*I*
exist’.  Certainly he uses the *words* ‘I’ and ‘mine’ for purposes of
conversation. But that is all. They are expressions current in the
world of which he makes use, but he is not at all affected by them.

The tendency to the conceit ‘I’ and ‘mine’
(*ahaṅkāramamaṅkāramānānusaya*) is not always apparent, for it is not
always on the surface. It lies deep-rooted and latent. It is something
that one perceives only when one reflects upon it. One does not
perceive it at all times even though it is present at all times lying
behind one’s thoughts and actions. In the Buddha, and in the Arahats,
this tendency is completely uprooted, never to arise again. When all
thoughts of ‘I’ and ‘mine’ are extinct and do not arise again, ‘my
existence’ or ‘I exist’ are also extinct and do not arise again.

The Arahat “has gone beyond all *bhava*” – *upaccagā
sabbabhavāni*.[^5] The Arahat Maha Kassapa declared that he had
“escaped from *bhava*” – *bhavābhinissato*.[^6] *Bhava* ceases with
the attainment of Arahatship.  Thereafter the Arahat lives freed from
*bhava*, delivered from *bhava*.  Before the ascetic Gotama attained
Arahatship all life that existed was *bhava*. With his attaining
Arahatship there came to be for the first time in the world a life
free of *bhava*.

*Bhava* is also called a fetter. This fetter is completely cut off and
destroyed in the Arahat. He is *parikkhīnabhavasaññojano*.[^7]

If *bhava* means ‘existence’ pure and simple, then the living Arahat
cannot have completely destroyed *bhava*, for as a living Arahat there
is an ‘existence’.[^8] The living Arahat has ‘existence’, but no
*bhava*. He is *bhava*-ceased. *Bhava* refers to the existence of
*all* modes of life *other than* that of the Arahats, simply because
all such modes of life, save the Arahat’s, are a case of ’*my*
existence’ or ‘self’-existence to some degree or other.

If the precise meaning of *bhava* is not understood there can be much
confusion with regard to the Buddha’s Teaching, particularly when it
comes to the Doctrine of Dependent Arising (*paṭiccasamuppāda*). The
Teaching will then become either a matter of faith, which will remain
beyond reach here, or a hypothesis left for future verification. But
the Buddha’s Teaching is neither a matter of faith nor a matter of
hypothesis. It is a teaching to be experienced here and now, all of
it, from beginning to end.

As with the word *tanhā*, there does not seem to be an exact
equivalent in English for the word *bhava*. This word is usually
translated as ‘becoming’ or ‘existence’ – all of which miss the
point.[^9] We shall therefore keep to the Pāi word *bhava*.

Wanting *bhava*, i.e., wanting ‘self’-existence or ‘my existence’ is
*bhava-tanhā*.

*Vibhava* is not so straightforward as *bhava*.

Some thinkers, in their search for truth, want to be quite certain of
everything they take to be true. They begin by doubting everything,
including their very existence. But by doubting their own existence
they very cleverly deceive themselves for the simple reason that their
very doubting proves their existence. To doubt also one must exist.
*Vibhava* stems out of this type of thinking. It is a denial of
existence.  Existence denies itself. But this denial of existence only
leads to a confirmation of existence. It does *not* lead to
*cessation* of existence.

Since, perhaps, it appears insane to deny existence whilst being
existent, this tendency to denial is pushed back (*atidhāvati*) to
‘after death’, and in the following manner a denial of existence is
made: “To the extent, revered Sir, that this self is of Form, is made
up of the Four Primary Modes, is from the union of the parents, is cut
off and destroyed on the dissolution of the body, and does not exist
after death, to that extent is there a complete cutting off of the
self.”[^10]

This thinking, in the final analysis, only confirms ‘self’-existence.
Thus *vibhava* – denial of ‘self’-existence – only confirms *bhava*,
only confirms ‘self’-existence. It does not lead to *cessation* of
‘self’-existence. Just as *bhava* is, *vibhava* is also based on
‘self’ and on thoughts of ‘I’ and ‘mine’. “Those worthy recluses and
brahmins who lay down for beings the cutting off, the destruction, the
denial of *bhava* (of ‘self’-existence), these, afraid of the ‘person’
(*sakkāya*), loathing the ‘person’, simply keep running and circling
round the ‘person’. Just as a dog that is tied by a leash to a strong
post keeps running and circling round the post, so do these worthy
recluses and brahmins, afraid of the ‘person’, loathing the ‘person’,
simply keep running and circling round the ‘person’.”[^11]

Wanting the cutting off of ‘self’-existence and the destruction of
‘self’-existence at death is called *vibhava-tanhā*.[^12] (It is an
undesirability because such a destruction of ‘self’-existence cannot
be got. ‘Self’-existence, or *bhava*, can be destroyed only by
following a particular training, i.e., by treading the Noble Eightfold
Path.)

Just as much as grasping belief in ‘self’ is the most fundamental of
the four kinds of Grasping, wanting *bhava* is the most fundamental of
the three kinds of *tanhā*.

Thus the *puthujjana*’s intentional action is determined by *tanhā*.
“So, Ānanda, action is the field, Consciousness the seed, and *tanhā*
the moisture.”[^13] Just as moisture must be present for the seed to
sprout up out of the field, so must *tanhā* be there for the
*puthujjana*’s Consciousness to arise from his intentional action.
*Tanhā* is one of the most powerful factors that go into the
fashioning of one’s life, yet it is one factor that can be brought
under immediate control. The necessity to control *tanhā* cannot be
overstressed if one is to progress. Hence the reason for the Buddha
laying so much stress on it.

In the texts the words *tanhā*, *chanda*, *rāga* and *nandi* often
come together. There seems to be a tendency to consider the words
*chanda*, *rāga* and *nandi* as being almost identical with *tanhā*.
They are not “various shades of *tanhā*”. They have their own meaning.

*Chanda* means desire, *rāga* means attachment, and *nandi* means
delight.  Desire, attachment and delight are things dependent on
*tanhā*. Were there no kind of wanting sense-pleasures or
‘self’-existence there can be no desire or attachment or delight.

> “Thus it is, Ānanda, that *tanhā* arises dependent on feeling,
> pursuit dependent on *tanhā*, gain dependent on pursuit decision
> dependent on gain, *desire* and *attachment* dependent on decision,
> tenacity dependent on desire and attachment, possession dependent on
> tenacity, avarice dependent on possession, watch and ward dependent
> on avarice, and many a bad and unskilled state of things such as
> blows and wounds, strife, contradiction and retort, quarrelling,
> slander and lies arise from keeping watch and ward.”[^14]

Desire (*chanda*), attachment (*rāga*) and delight (*nandi*) have also
been referred to as Grasping (*upādāna*). “Friend, Visakha, that
desire and attachment there is in the Five Grasping Groups, that
there, is the Grasping.”[^15] And, “Whatsoever there is delight in
Feeling, that is Grasping.”[^16] This means to say that grasping
something also means desiring of it, or being attached to it, or
delighting in it.  This is so because desiring, or being attached, or
delighting, is *in effect* the same as regarding as ‘mine’. It is a
matter of direct experience that when desire, attachment or delight
exist ‘I’ and ‘mine’ also exist. It is only an ‘I’ that can desire
something or be attached to it or delight in it.

*Tanhā*, desire, attachment, delight, are all supports for *bhava*.
‘*I* exist’ or ‘*my* existence’ stands supported by these. *Bhava*
hangs on these as its “cord”. They are called the “cord of *bhava*”
(*bhavanetti*).  “Whatever desire, attachment, delight, *tanhā*,
whatever tendencies to determinations, attachments, and to the
grasping of various means there are in the mind, Radha, towards Form …
Feeling … Perception … Determinations … Consciousness, that is
called the cord of *bhava*. The cessation of these is the cessation of
the cord of *bhava*.”[^17]

Just as a bunch of mangoes hanging by a stalk will fall down when the
stalk is cut, so will *bhava* disappear when the cord of *bhava* is
cut.  The Buddha said that he stood with the cord of *bhava* cut. Thus
he stood freed from *bhava*. “Just, monks, as when the stalk of a
bunch of mangoes has been cut, all the mangoes that were hanging on
that stalk go with it, just so, monks, the body of the Tathāgata
stands with the cord that binds it to *bhava* cut
(*ucchinnabhavanettiko*).”[^18]

[^1]: Pleasure, it should be noted, is not the feeling born of the
    senses. One can take pleasure in a feeling or not take pleasure in
    it. Thus pleasure is a matter of one’s mental attitude. The Buddha
    said that his mind was freed from the Canker of sense-pleasure
    (*kāmāsavāpi citta vimuccitva*). Sight, sound, smell, taste and
    touch are the strands of sense-pleasure (*kāmagunā*).

[^2]: This should not lead the reader to think that since *bhava* and
    upādāna are really a matter of one’s thinking they can be easily
    got rid of if necessary. If one completely gets rid of the thought
    ‘mine’ so that it will never arise again, then one has become
    Arahat.

[^3]: Majjhima Nikāya 36.

[^4]: Itivuttaka 100.

[^5]: Udāna, Nanda Vagga, Sutta No. 10.

[^6]: Theragāthā 1089.

[^7]: Saṃyutta Nikāya III, Khandha Saṃyutta, Anta Vagga, Sutta No. 8.

[^8]: See page 56. FIXME: add link

[^9]: Sometimes *bhava* is seen translated as rebirth! The extent to
    which the meaning of the Suttas (Discourses) is hidden from the
    reader by such inaccuracies can thus be seen.

[^10]: Dīgha Nikāya 1.

[^11]: Majjhima Nikāya 102.

[^12]: See Appendix on Vibhava-tanhā, pages 172 and 173. FIXME: add link

[^13]: Anguttara Nikāya I, Tika Nipāta, Ānanda Vagga, Sutta No. 6.

[^14]: Dīgha Nikāya 15.

[^15]: Majjhima Nikāya 44.

[^16]: Majjhima Nikāya 38.

[^17]: Saṃyutta Nikāya III, Rādha Samyutta, Bhavanetti Sutta.

[^18]: Dīgha Nikāya 1.

